Well, we have an editorial board, which consists of David McKittrick, he's a librarian at Trinity College, Cambridge, Alan Bell, who's the librarian of the Rhodes House Library at Oxford, and Ted Hoffman, who used to be an independent bookseller, but is now with Bernard Quaritch, and Steve Weissman at Simones.
And we, all of us, write bits of it.
It complicates matters that things like the longer features like the sale notes and reviews of booksellers' catalogs are often written by several of us, you know, on a sort of paragraph by paragraph or even sentence by sentence basis.
We work very much as a team.
Every now and again, of course, particularly with obituaries,
other people write contributions to it.
And sometimes people will... I mean, people do know the advantages of exposure in news and comment as opposed to a full-length book review.
I mean, somebody who's perhaps produced a very big grand exhibition catalogue
for example, will send us a copy and say, do you think you could find room for a paragraph on this in news and comment?
And I like to do this because I know actually that it's the most heavily read section, which is the one section that everybody who gets it always reads.
So you know that you're giving people who may or may not read book reviews, but they always read news and comment.
Are you an active collector yourself?
You remind me, there's a lovely poem, I can't quite eat it, from memory, by Lord Dunsany, which runs something like this, you'll have to forgive my own blame, parody.
Were you proud, Helen,
to send so many brave men to their deaths, to see the destruction of ships, to see a whole city burned to the ground.
Proud?
I'll say I was.
And, no, you can't cure me.
any other notes to come well i have one you're fairly well known um nicholas for not for your dilatoriness so much as your tardiness how do you think about music coming up to date it's fairly uh current perhaps that
No, I won't tell anybody.
You may notice that I arrived, I was standing decently early for lunch today, that they had to send out for you and tell them.
Well, yes, I reckon.
I have terrible trouble with my telephone bill in the British Library.
They've now started monitoring the telephone bill.
It's been discovered.
that my telephone bill is actually ten times as big as the telephone bill of anybody else in the British Library.
It'll be seen if it's me to explain to them that I actually do ten times as much work as the British Library and the telephone is an essential part of this.
My working day starts usually around six o'clock.
And I work from 6 until breakfast time, at which point the telephone starts ringing, thus making me late for my first appointment of the day.
The fact that I'm late for the first appointment of the day usually has a knock-on effect for the rest of the day.
And my last appointment, which is going to bed at night, is usually also postponed.
I don't know.
It comes with trying to cram too much into the day and not saying no to enough people.
Have I ever said no to you?
Thank you for coming today.
Have I ever said no to you, Marcus?
No, never.
Few people have lived to tell the tale.
Never, ever.
Thank you very much.
So I would just contact you at the British Library.
Let me give you the address.
It's the British Library.
Great Russell Street.
Uh-huh.
London.
WC1B.
Uh-huh.
3DG.
3 Delta Golf.
That's right.
Great Russell.
It's lovely.
I've been there.
It's a very magical place to walk into.
Right.
I guess...
Does anyone, to your knowledge, one of the areas I'm going to be looking into is, we'll start with an anecdote of Rosenwald's and his book, Recollections of a Collector, where he recalls having told... Hi, Georgia.
Nice to see you again.
Yeah.
I've heard him lecture twice in a week.
I'm practicing three times.
Three times?
That's pretty good.
In a month.
Who, to your knowledge, collects the unspeakable things for the sake of preserving them, like anti-Semitic things or racist things?
And I'm reminded of Rosenwald's purchase of this Trent document and that manuscript, which he then gave to an organization in Waltham to keep in perpetuity.
And three years ago, they sold it at South East for $176,000 for the whole purpose of it.
The Council of Trent trial... Well, it's a trial of the Jews and some such thing.
And it basically justified anti-Semitic.
But the point was, he told Rosenbach, price is no logic.
I mean, he never said that when he bought the Gutenberg Bible.
And this was something he detested.
He didn't even want to put it in his own collection.
And I'm just wondering if this is a worthy area for me to pursue.
Are there people who feel so motivated to collect these hateful things?
I'll see you later tonight.
I should have enjoyed that.
Is it an interesting area, do you think?
I don't think so.
I mean, in the first place, I don't believe that anybody's ever devoted...
I mean, people have devoted time to collecting suppressed books, dirty books, politically hot books, this sort of thing.
usually incidentally rather than, I mean, just like, I mean, Mr. Rosenwald buying that was very much a backwater, a sideline of what he was really interested in.
He said he didn't want it to fall into the hands of the Nazis.
Well, it was the Nazis.
He didn't want them to get it.
And he didn't even want to keep it.
Then he gave it to another... Anyway, it was just an interesting... How do you feel about
great collections like the Bradley Martin collection.
Now here is what is said to be the finest ornithological falling into private.
I'm desperately sad that it's been broken up, not on account of the color plate books, which are in a sense neither here nor there, but because of the staggering collection of
of uh you know commercially worthless little books called the avi fauna of guatemala or something like that which which which it cost him nothing but there they all were but i mean the other fact is bradley whom i knew quite well over a long time had had plenty of time to think and had plenty of uh plenty of uh opportunities for
keeping his collection together if he'd wanted to, and he clearly decided not to, and so is my way to say.
It is suggested by some people who would be in a position to know that there was a, I don't know if it's a codicil, but there was something in his will to the effect that if the trustees are able to keep this together as a collection and in the process derive less money, they should feel free to go ahead and do this.
But the Bessemer Trust, which were the executives of the estate, said their responsibility was to maximize the return, and they ignored that.
I've heard this suggested by somebody who you know is American.
Well, I mean, obviously the only sensible way to find out that is to get hold of a copy of his will and see if it's there.
But it seems to me it's somewhat out of character, because Bradley was a person who knew his own mind, and I can't see him... I can't see him...
Well, it is said in the first catalogue of the wholesale in 1911, Beverly Chew quotes, he was saying, well, if it weren't for collectors, where would I have gotten my books?
And this is suggested in the first volume of the Martin catalogue.
Do you think he was thinking of collectors of the upcoming generations?
Well, I mean, I...
I think that Bradley Martin belonged to a very definite class of collectors of whom Mr. Houghton is another, for whom the act of collecting was almost more than the possession.
And I don't think until quite recent, and I don't think until, you know, only about a dozen years ago when he got this house down in Virginia.
I don't think that he had really sort of thought of his collection other than a lovely thing to have.
And I think that the moving of all the Byrd books down to Virginia was probably the first sort of time he'd ever sat and thought about his collection in bulk.
And, well, anyway, I'm sure he thought about it.
Well, you say he is, you suspect that he is one of these collectors to whom the acquisition is more important than the possession.
Well, not the acquisition.
The hunt, the exercise.
Yes, I mean, Arthur Houghton... But Houghton did start a library, on the other hand.
Well, I mean, he and I were a library, but his books went elsewhere.
Arthur...
loved the atmosphere in the old Rosenbach, later Fleming shop.
And dropping by on his way back from the office to talk, maybe buy a book, meet some people, was a part of his life, which he very much valued and loved and liked.
And when he got old and a lot of the people who had been part of that circle died,
It didn't seem so much fun anymore.
And I know from talking to him that he sold his books because there wasn't anybody to talk to about them anymore.
Isn't that amazing?
I know you want to run.
Could you give me the... No, no, no, I'm not running.
I mean, it's only quarter past one.
It's another 15 minutes.
15 minutes would be very generous.
Could you give me the names of some people in England who you would recommend I see?
when I come over early next year.
Direct me so I can do some background.
See, this is such a wonderful opportunity for me of getting this background, the preliminaries done.
On both the institutional and the private levels.
Well, you see, yes, go and talk to
Fred Ratliff.
Frederick Ratliff.
At the Cambridge University Library.
Among institutional librarians.
And go and talk to Anthony Rotter, who's a book dealer.
Harry Scrolls, what I say?
R-O-T-A.
The firm's name is Bertram Rotter.
Um...
I connected with Nicholas Poole Wilson last week at Southerby's.
Yes.
Well, of course, Quaritch is a very big general firm with a large number of customers in all sorts of walks of life.
And you would pick up more from talking to the staff of Quaritch's about who's buying what, where in the world than anybody else now.
They are said to have bought the Cervantes were a Spanish collector, by the way.
They spent $1.5 million.
It was expected to get $300,000.
Extraordinary.
I'm sorry.
I'm not sure that there's...
That'll get me going.
Yes, we'll get you going.
Okay.
How about any general views on these?
You mentioned how your publication brings everyone together, booksellers, book buyers, collectors, librarians.
How about is there any quality?
I mean, book collecting is something that you can trace back centuries.
Is there anything
that you see in terms of a personality trait that is consistent what is it that makes a person that drives a person to go out and spend god knows uh hundreds of dollars
What is it?
Do you have an answer for that?
Well, I mean, the amount of money is completely irrelevant.
I mean, it's one way of dividing up the human race.
Those who read and those who don't read and those who read tend to accumulate books of all sorts.
The accumulation of books is an activity that grows on geometric progression.
The more you have, the faster they come in.
You mentioned in your preface to the garden catalogue that no apology is needed, which is an interesting line.
Well... Apology, I beg your pardon, but there's a difference, I guess.
I don't know that any apology was offered either.
Not by or more in any case.
At least in England, whatever it was, it was an apology.
Sir, I'll be done in about two minutes.
No, I can't do that.
There's any...
Do you think it was a case of cashing in?
How do you feel about that?
I haven't remissed that yet.
But we're not even talking about the Gardner collection.
It's in general about collecting as investments.
Well, the only thing I will say, I think that books are the very last thing that anybody ever spends money on with intent to see the money back.
This might be an exception, however, to go from the general to the specific.
I absolutely don't know the answer to that question.
But I don't believe it to be true by the account of either party.
I don't believe that Mr. Davis... I mean, look at Mr. Davis.
I mean, if Mr. Davis had been a simple investor wishing to sink a large sum of money in books with intent to make a profit on it,
He wouldn't have gone near Haven O' Moor.
He would have gone to a trustworthy bookseller or put himself in the hands of Sotheby's or something.
Except you hear the talk in the underground that Haven O' Moorhead is a small guy, if I call him.
But then that proves my point, doesn't it?
That whatever influence induced Mr. Davis to put money into these books, it wasn't a pure desire to invest.
A quick question.
One other area I wish to explore is the alleged indiscriminate spending of certain institutions, such as the University of Texas during the 60s.
Any comments on that?
Roger started, for instance, at Harvard things.
He said, I think that there's nothing indiscriminate at all about that.
He said, I think that's just a case of other institutions being jealous because they acquired so many wonderful things.
No, I mean, Ransom's own pronouncements on this are absolutely unequivocal, that the money was there, the material was there, and there was more than enough money to buy up all the material within sight.
The crucial factor in the situation was that unless it was bought up quickly, it would disappear.
So Ransom said, don't count the cost, don't worry about duplication, but we've only got 10 years to do all this before something catches up.
He was quite right.
In fact, that goes back to what you said earlier before we started, is that this wall is right.
There's no more money on the institutional level.
So they should be very thrilled to have what they had.
They should be very thrilled with what they got.
I mean, exactly.
So you think that his position then has been vindicated?
Oh, very much so, yes.
And he has a wonderful collection to do.
There is a staggering collection which they'll go on exploring for centuries.
I mean, I've heard it said that they spent half a million dollars for Graham Greene's toilet tissue, I mean, which is obviously an exaggeration.
But they did spend big money for, apparently,
I don't think so, ever.
Really?
No, I don't think so.
I think they certainly paid big money for things, and I dare say some of the things that they bought when they got them didn't on inspection measure up quite to expectation.
But I don't believe that on one single occasion did the University of Texas
spend a sum of money that wasn't within reasonable proportions the value of the goods that they bought.
I mean, when Siegfried Sassoon's library with all his manuscripts were sold, they went to that sale and they bid everybody out of sight, so that out of three or four hundred lots, only six went
didn't go to the University of Texas.
But, and they paid more money than anybody thought the books were going to fetch.
But they bought it against real opposition, and real opposition isn't going to... I mean, in book sales, it's not the price that the buyer buys that counts, it's the price that the underbuyer drops out at, which is critical.
Because you never find out how much the buyer would have been prepared to pay.
He might have been prepared to pay double or treble what he ended up paying.
So that if you regard the underbidder in that sale as being the truer index of the value than what Texas paid, you can see that they weren't paying.
They may have been paying a lot more than they expected, but they weren't paying
a wild uncontrolled fund.
They were paying an increment higher than another person was willing to spend.
That's right.
And the existence of the underbidders is, if you follow me, a control on the figure that they ended up spending.
And I think that was true of everything that they bought, you know.
That is excellent.
Good, good.
I'm going to wrap up on that.
Right.
This is a very nice man, if you want to get involved in this, and it seems to me a particularly good story, called Donald Dickinson, who is at the School of Library Service at the University of Arizona, who has written a book, which I hope somebody will publish, on...
uh the story of huntington's collection and in particular he's one of my champions and uh he knows more about it than anybody else the gentleman's name once again donald i think c dickinson certainly donald dickinson donald c dickinson at the university of arizona yeah and um and yes very much
That's excellent.
Yes.
And I can't think of anybody else at the moment who's sort of working on a sort of specific history.
Well, that's good for me.
Well, I know, except that these books...
You know, competition is rare, and even when it happens, it's often beneficial.
Oh, I think it's... It pushes us to do better work and to get it done quickly.
Well, all the very best.
Thank you, sir.
I'll be in touch.
Thank you very much for your time.
Let's start again.
The difference between a rare book and a scarce book.
First folio Shakespeare is not a scarce book.
No, because there are 150 or so other rare books.
Uh-huh.
You can bring Bible the same, 40 copies.
It's a rare book.
But Tamerlane is a scarce book.
And a rare book.
And a rare book, both.
But it's something you know when you see it.
You can't give a difference.
Well, it's rare.
Well, my predecessor and...
Lawrence Roth and William A. Jackson.
What Bill Jackson did was go back and you'll see it in the second definition of rare in the OED.
And what in the OED?
The second definition of the word rare in the Oxford English Dictionary.
Rarity implies a value in his consideration in rarity.
Scarcity.
It's statistical.
Very interesting.
The OED, of course, cites the first instance in the English language of Bibliomania to Dibdin.
And reading Dibdin, I have Dibdin, he cites earlier.
Oh, yeah.
I think the word's been around a lot longer than the OED realizes.
Oh, of course.
Well, I think... Yeah, but they pride themselves in having the first known... Well, at the time, remember, that came early in the alphabet.
Yeah, 1809.
But that volume of the OED was early in the alphabet.
So it was done in the 1880s or 60s.
Whenever Murphy and Murray started.
That's an interesting point.
You know, when you use the OAD, you should always look at the date of the publication of that book, because it went over such a long period of time.
That's a good point.
But just going to Dibdin himself, I mean, I've just been... What Dibdin did was create the modern concept.
of book collecting as a fashionable, grandiose kind of thing to do.
Because he addressed the book to Richard Heber, who already had 300,000 books.
Yeah, but it all came out of the Roxburgh Club.
And the creation of the Roxburgh Club.
which was the granddaddy of them all.
It was his member, by the way.
Oh, sure.
What does he collect, by the way, in Washington?
I'm going to shut this up.
The last gentleman who just spoke was Tom Adams, director emeritus of the John Carter Brown Library in Providence, which is a major source for what I'm writing about.
So that's another good hit.
Today, by the way, is November 15th, 1989.
This is tape two of the Marker presentation.
Oh, wonderful.
When Cummins, when the bidding on the Shakespeare's kind of stalled at 185, and he said, think about it.
Right.
And then I asked Dick what he was thinking about at that moment.
And it wasn't a question of the dome, by the way.
Apparently he had access, he had an opportunity to get another Shakespeare, but was this one a great one?
And he concluded that it was, and confidentially, that at twice the price it was a bargain.
Well, that might be me.
I've heard that one many times.
I love that song.
But I think more likely what happened was that he had a pre-determined price he was going to.
And we got past that.
That's why I said things about it.
He also told me, and I have it in the piece I'm writing for Maine Antiques Digest, is that he came to get the Chivantes and the Book of Daniel, too.
And I guess he said he was underbidder on the Daniel, which is what, what did that go for, 600 or some such thing?
The Chivantes, of course, went crazy.
They went for a buck and a half.
So he came to play.
He came to play ball that day.
Yeah, he did.
What was my question?
He's a wonderful bidder.
Well, Cummins does is, did Cummins nod?
I didn't see it.
Yeah, yeah.
I said he nodded.
I said in my piece, and this is just a small item, but I knew who was bidding.
Yeah.
Some of these you don't even say.
I mean, I kept very careful, very careful records of the sale.
And for most, here's the piece.
You can take this one.
No, thanks.
That's, yeah.
uh as you can see i kept very careful records now i've got like krause you said krause on the first lot right uh others went by numbers after a while we could figure that quaritch was 157. some of you don't say any at all how do we know who that is how do you uh well let me see well this is my notes yeah a question mark for instance not that i care to know it that it's quite irrelevant maybe an order bit no that's probably what it is i had a bit i had a lot of bits in the book
Yeah.
Order bid.
People send you a written commission.
And then when I get that, I don't call those names out generally.
I would put the button off, the speaker off, and just say, you know, Nick bought that one or something.
I'm a collector, by the way.
You'll see in this piece, by the way, and this is something that you, believe me, this is useful.
Because you'll see in my piece, Dick Manny, for instance, rushed from New York to the Boston Book Fair.
Which is, you know, I prowl these things.
Mm-hmm.
You know, you go looking for a $0.25 deal, but, you know, a wonderful find, $2.05.
But that's the beauty, I think, of going to auctions, of any kind of collecting pursuit, is that you can... Well, we had that poem book last year.
Well, I... To cut that, too, by the way.
You mentioned in the book that it was a commercial fisherman.
Yeah.
Is this guy really committed to anonymity, do you think?
Do you think he'd talk for...
Talk to somebody about his collecting for a work in progress?
It's possible.
I mean, we could try.
It was up here someplace, you know.
He came into our office in Boston.
In Boston, I know that.
Yeah.
That's a very interesting... I'll send you some stuff if you like that I've written.
I'll tell you what you can do is ask Pat Ward, who runs our office here.
I don't really know.
I don't want to embarrass anybody.
I mean, it's a perfectly normal request that either the person can do it or not.
I'd love to talk to this guy because obviously he's a collector.
We all collect at different levels.
And I've asked myself, if I got the camera lame, would I keep it?